.. a.

e - 2

ASHOK DA. RANADE


India-The Land and the People

Hindustani Music

ASHOK DA. RANADE

NATIONAL BOOK TRUST Tamra

ISBN 81-237-2199-4

First Edition 1997

Reprints 2002, 2005 (Saka 1927)

© Ashok Da. Ranade, 1993

Rs. 50.00

Published by the Director, National Book Trust, India
A-5 Green Park, New Delhi-110016

CONTENTS

Preface
Music of India: Varieties and Features

Towards Hindustani Art Music:
Before and After the Middle Ages

Raga, Tala and Bandish
Techniques of Elaboration

Forms of Music
Vocal Art Music
Vocal Light Music

Instruments and Instrumental Music

Gharana-s and their Contribution
. Major Gharana-s in Hindustani
Vocal Music
Major Gharana-s in Hindustani
Instrumental Music

Some Major Theoreticians
Music for the Masses
Epilogue

Glossary

Short Notes

Discography

Select Bibliography

Index

a

14
29
44

57
66

75

90

105
121
128
133
135
147
150
158
163

MUSIC OF INDIA:
VARIETIES AND FEATURES

A study of the territorial distribution of the spread of Hindustani
classical music comes close to shaking up the political map of
India, as if in protest against the borders imposed on it! The
reason is simple. If one uses tests such as the number of musical
notes approved, basic musical scales accepted, musical instru-
ments in circulation, rhythms used, methods governing the pro-
duction of voice, current musical symbolism and finally the total
behaviour of the people in relation to music—the musical map
clearly overruns the political map. In fact, one notices similarities
in the music of regions such as Arabia, Afghanistan, Pakistan,
Iran, Bangladesh, Central Asian Republics, Tibet, Nepal and In-
dia. In other words, musical affinities seem to blur the geopoliti-
cal lines that separate the regions and their inhabitants. Many a
music-researcher is, therefore, of the opinion that a new musical
mapping of the world should be brought forth to counter the
poisonous work of the separatist forces. Even if this sounds too
ambitious, it is true that such an attempt would certainly make
one aware of the unifying force of music, as also proud of the
collective heritage of mankind. Hindustani art music is also a
product of the efforts of many races, professing many religions
and speaking many languages. Hence, the first question to ask is
“What is Hindustani art music?”

History tells us that the word ‘Hindustan’ was originally
employed by the early invaders who, in order to understand and
identify the bewilderingly vast and varied country, relied on
racial, geographical, religious and linguistic criteria. Thus, to
them Hindustan was predominantly Aryan and it was also lim-
ited to northern India, that is, the region above the Narmada
river excluding Bengal, Bihar and the north-eastern territory. The

2 HINDUSTANI MUSIC

region was largely peopled b
gic i ‘ y followers of th i
a ~~ associated with speakers of Indo-European ene
e languages are known today). Forces of history acted

ion See its boundaries Bengal, Bihar, Maharashtra and
ers. Diversity of i i ’ '
a ty of every conceivable kind became a prominent

Pete asnaon of Hi oa at SYS nearcom
there are no taboos against j don of Sones ee aA
ieee §ainst inclusion of themes from other reli-
ie a — ‘art’ may pose certain problems—used as we are

idea that all music is bound to be ‘artistic’! Perhaps

period of usage, etc., then all th i ic i i
pee folk, devotional, art mol pose See in
Ser ee as classical! Finally, it is necessary to “rade
oem y users of the term classical often wanted to suggest
music was less progressive and dynamic. Very cen

MUSIC OF INDIA 3

they* compared Hindustani music with the already defunct and
fossilized music of the ancient Western traditions. Foreigners
facing the extreme diversity of the Indian musical scene had
naturally latched on to the ideas, terms and theories familiar to
them, but views, thus, formed can hardly be justified if the
correct meanings and musical contents are examined. That the
newly educated Indian writers and thinkers continued to use the
term classical is, to say the least, symptomatic of a lingering

colonialism. However, if one is to make concessions to current
usage and employ the term classical to denote art music, the
qualifications noted here would have to be borne in mind.

The situation has, however, changed considerably and a
more valid angle is possible. To make the issues clearer, more

Five categories of music

* Early users such as William Jones, Captain Willard, Captain Day, etc.
Please refer: Indology and Ethnomusicology: Contours of Early Indo-British
Relationship, Ashok Da. Ranade, Promilla, New Delhi, 1992, pp.27-80.
Also: Hindu Music, compiled by Raja Sourendramohan Tagore,
Choukhamba Sanskrit Series, Varanasi, third edn, 1965.

MUSIC OF INDIA 5

is usually taken as the lone instance of primitive music. Hence,
a seemingly paradoxical statement can be made: all music of the
tribal people may not be primitive while some music of the
urban non-tribal people may be termed primitive! For instance,
disco and rap music and similar other urban modern manifesta-
tions are primitive, while a stanza of a Gond marriage song is so
complex in construction and presentation, that it will have to be
described as non-primitive to that extent. The situation, though
complex, ceases to be confusing if we remember that music
should be identified on the basis of the experience it intends to
give and the structural features it displays prominently.

Chief Features

In many cases adima music combines dancing, singing and the
playing of instruments. It may, thus, prove difficult to come
across primitive expression which is music or dance alone. This

towns and five-and-a-half-

broadcasting network antennas sc villages! The existing may create difficulties in understanding or assessing it in the

lation and the television senag ‘y-eight per cent of the Popu- usual manner. This kind of composite expression is perhaps

fore, to be expected that music of Tenet behind. It is, there- connected with the fact that it represents an attempt to respond
ic of all categories has flowed in the to the three natural cycles which largely determine the course of

life in India—day and night, birth and death, and the seasons.
On account of this larger relationship adima music is not made
for its own sake. It certainly appears to be directed at some
higher power including Nature. The evocative function of music
is reflected in the special regard displayed for various rituals:
they have a place in the conception, presentation as well as
preservation of music.

It is not an exaggeration to say that adima music means
music for everyone, everything, and for every occasion. General
participation is encouraged to such an extent in the process of
making music that there is a near absence of the audience as a
separate entity: no one is merely engaged in listening to music.
The role of the community, as such, is so vital that the cultural
group or the community rather than the solitary composer is
said to be responsible for creating the music. Normally all activi-
ties stressing the collective aspect of human life depend on rhythm
as a‘binding agent. It is, therefore, natural that adima music gives
more scope to rhythm than melody and very often the former is
also more attractive.

By and large, the category holds songs more important than

usic of the tribals alone! Features enumer-
similar would easily be detected in the
an communities even though tribal music


6 HINDUSTANI MUSIC

music and yet primitive son: i i
g§ can hardly be fitted
commonly accepted definition of song. This is chiefly so ene
of the norms applied to the category.
To make, receive or appreciate adima music certain identifi-

mo sound’ is considered important simply by virtue of it
ing a ‘sound’. This is in contrast to the general tendency t
a5 sounds only if they are meaningful, as in language _
in ft teers primitive music stands for something else out-
— and a very pervasive symbolism can be detected. In
eo aa rete it keeps very close to the day-to-day life and its
a the aac One interesting consequence is that ordinary
a. Procedures may be used in music-making. It is logi-
= aaa Soy sense of hearing would rule supreme in
ty. However, in primitive music the sense
touch also comes into strong reckoning. It is, f 4
that holding of hands, foot-stamping, body thax nen” on
like become noticeable condiat o ro teal oe aa

Folk Music

Eroaelty speaking, each of the well-defined linguistic regions of

nel kien can be assumed to have its own folk music and,

ied emit ga now emphasize the plurality while dis-
‘usic. Certain features, however, a t

mon to all regional traditions, a fact idiot in a

nature of the cate i i
scapeliglling gory as also the essential unity of Indian cul-

Instrumental music enj i i
l sic enjoys a kind of ubiquity in th
fees gt of music. It is almost everywhere ke oe a.
Me ‘© enjoy independent operation. Instruments are pressed
mo service mostly to accompany singers/dancers. Even when

MUSIC OF INDIA 7

the music is made solo, instruments try to follow or emulate
music originally designed for or produced by voices. The effec-
tiveness and the musical value of musical instruments is judged
according to their capacity to approximate vocal music.

Collectivity reigns supreme in creation, presentation, recep-
tion and also, perhaps, in preservation of folk music. Folk music
is meant for the entire body of an organized human group
bound by specific cultural ties indicating commonality of lan-
guage, geographical location, social convention, and so on. It
emerges, circulates and lives as their expression.

A number of items in folk music are linked to certain
non-musical activities in a definite manner. For example, har-
vesting and pounding of corn and similar other chores have
songs associated with them in many regions of India. This is the
functionality of folk music which means that the relationship
between the music and the associated task is not a vague psycho-
logical coexistence of the two; it indicates a firmer mutual rela-
tionship which goes much beyond mere suggestivity. Very often,
the non-musical activities provide purpose as well as structure to
folk music, making it more immediate and endowing it with a
direct appeal not easily paralleled.

It has often been said that folk music has no beginning and
no perceivable end. The remark is obviously intended to empha-
size the element of continuity it enjoys as an expression repre-
sentative of a cultural group. Cultural groups can rarely be
placed with exact accuracy on the time and space axis. Hence,
their folk music is also expected to flow on and become one with
the life of the community, which is perhaps, why it is often
described as eternal. Contrary to common perception, folk music
does change, though selectively. That is to say, it accepts changes
in certain aspects while in some others it is extremely averse to

alterations. For example, the more entertaining of its facets and
forms are prone to change faster than the religious or ritualistic.
Referring to strictly musical contexts, rhythms change less readily
than melodies or tunes. The science of folk music, ethnomusi-
cology and similar other disciplines carry out deeper studies of
the processes of charge in folk music.
Folk music tends to maintain a two-way relationship with
the art music of the land of the same period, for many reasons.
Some features of art music percolate to folk music or folk musi-


8 HINDUSTANI Music

mee tar ee and ee folk music are so intimately con-
‘ can legitimately claim to be thi i
expression of the concerned community. For’ S the fale
: of | unity. For example, th
music of Britain would be Particular to it as a rial, aati

MUSIC OF INDIA 9

generation and spread of popular musical products.

The mass-media function as a major shaping influence. Me-
dia-language, time-restrictions /allocations, transmission facilities
and such other operational features govern the form as well as
content of popular music.

Popular music is patently patron-oriented. Consequently,
every change in patronage is reflected more readily in this cat-
egory than in any other. Also, no other category is so inexorably
ruled by market economy as is the popular. Demand and sup-
ply, distribution, and profit margins forcefully come into play.

The target audience is less selective and the term ‘mass’
indicates a rather undiscriminating body of receivers. Fashions,
topical interests and prohibitions operate to determine almost
every aspect of music in this category. In the final analysis, the
socio-cultural and not the aesthetic criteria become more rel-
evant in popular music. :

Devotional Music

Widely known as bhakti sangeet, devotional music came into
existence largely as a result of the saint-poets or their followers’
work in the different Indian regions. To begin with, the saint-
poets were poet cum composers devoted to either Shiva or Vishnu,
though in the later centuries deities as well as cult loyalties
became more diverse. The saint-poets composed, sang, and passed.
on thousands of songs through the oral tradition. These songs
became a part of the heritage of the land. They continue to serve
as models for contemporary efforts prompted by similar feel-
Devotional music exhibits some easily identifiable structural
features. Compositions in this category invariably carry the name
of the composer in the last line. Names of the guru as well as the
worshipped deity also find a mention. These compositions are in
different regional languages collectively known as Prakrit (in
contrast to Sanskrit). According to many experts there are strong
reasons to believe that the Prakrit tongues are more musical due
to some inherent qualities.

Predictably, the metrical moulds employed by the saint-po-
ets are of Prakrit origin. One special metrical feature of the
Prakrit tradition ( apart from their notable variety) is their inher-
ent flexibility. This makes the metres more conducive to making

10 HINDUSTANI MUSIC

music. An uninhibited stretching of individ i
1 : ual words, mid-lin,
breaks, variable line-lengths and such other features obviously

have a long and wides ition i
: Pread tradition in the coun : ~
as Malhar, Hindol, and Des easily come to mind. i tet
A judicious mixture of solo and the choral modes of rendering

quire less maintenance!”
Indian devotional music normally surges in two streams,

one of them flows nearer to art i i remains
closer to folk music. oo) ee

MUSIC OF INDIA 11

Art Music

We will engage in a fuller discussion of Hindustani art music
later. It may, however, be useful to briefly put down at this
juncture broad features of art music. In this way the similarities
and contrasts that art music enjoys with the other categories
would show up in relief.

Performers in this category intentionally strive to attain aes-
thetic or artistic goals. In turn, they also bargain for an aesthetic
appreciation from the audience. It will not be incorrect to say
that in a concert of Hindustani music the most crucial test a
listener has to pass is to express approval/disapproval of the
musical proceedings at the right moment and in a proper man-
ner!

One of the most distinctive features of art music is to display
in two streams running concurrently: the scholastic and the per-
forming. The first stream formulates, systematizes and records
rules expected to govern musical operations, while the second is
telated to actual presentations. In the long run, the latter out-
paces the former—a case which has a parallel in the literature
and grammar of any language.

Art music deliberately concentrates on expressing entirely
(or mostly) through the auditory channel. To that extent, it be-
comes more abstract unlike folk or primitive music which are
more concrete on account of their appeal to many senses (in
addition, of course, to the auditory).

Art music affords more scope to individuals than to groups.
The predominance of the solo mode in the Hindustani system is
to be placed in this context. An individual performer is, conse-
quently, allowed more freedom. He can elaborate or improvise
on the basic musical structures according to his own aesthetic

intentions and ideas. Thus, unlike the collective quality of folk,
primitive and devotional music, art music tends to emphasize
the individuality of the artist.

This category displays an impressive array of forms (genres)
of music. In Hindustani music, for example, dhrupad, dhamar,
khayal, tarana, trivat, gat, and peshkar namber among the forms of
music. An easy parallel from literature would point to the short
story, novel, and essay as forms of literature. Forms of music
also exist in other musical categories, but those in the art cat-
egory result largely from aesthetic and musicological consider-

12 HINDUSTANI MUSIC

ations. This observation would beco i
me clearer
when more ground is covered. here lic tan
It is in art music that styles, schools, guru-shishya and other

category are written—as is to be ex in vi i

pint Bog pected in view of its scholas-

va ae already been suggested that art music requires a spe-
of audience. The enjoyment of art music increases in

8 result of features such as the abstract quality, codification
and so on. It is, of course, obvious that an overall sweetness,

music and musicians. To a certain de ee music-~ ing is li
Participating in a game—you can play se enjoy Sear deka
Tules, Otherwise, you have to rest content with simply feelin,
the thrill, the physicality, and the exhilaration! In other wort,
though everybody likes music only.a few have a taste for it This
is so because while taste is acquired, liking is natural, bein
—_ ones upbringing and environment. : aie
; Music Often joins hands with other artistic -
ized in painting, drama, dance, and the like, to res a

other arts or areas of life! This seemi
I a e! emingly opposing tend.
— in the final analysis, conducive to the lineies poe
h at art music is in search of. This aspect of its functioning would
ecome clear when the schools of art music and the forms and

Styles are discussed. a

Almost as a corollary to the featur

é : ‘ €s enumerated so far,
music claims a kind of autonomy. It, therefore, tries to sre

MUSIC OF INDIA 13

measure this detachment from the mundane makes its appeal
More enduring. Herein lies the secret of the longevity of raga-s,
tala-s and bandish-s in Hindustani art music. For hundreds of
years they have continued to hold sway—long after their cre-
ators have departed from the scene.

Conclusion
Hindustani art music is to be appreciated in the perspective
offered by the five categories taken together. Each category is
musically rich, varied and substantial enough to deserve sepa-
rate treatment. Unfortunately, the musical legitimacy of the pen-
tad is not yet accepted by thinkers and writers, as well as per-
formers. That is why sweeping theorization or pan-Indian claims
about musical matters remain unconvincing. A few examples of
generalizations that do not stand scrutiny are: Indian music has
not changed and has had an unbroken tradition from the Vedic
times; Indian art music has no place for poetry or meaningful
words; and all Hindustani music is a gift of Islam to India.
Proper appreciation of musical categories and their respective
thrusts would help in improving learning-teaching, propaga-
tion, documentation, dissemination, appreciation, research and a
host of other equally desirable music-related activities. The five
categories are part of a single complex culture and, therefore,
enjoy overlaps. Yet, their structures, performing strategies, mu-
sical functions are too different to allow confusion. Though a
category may dominate a region during a particular period, a
total absence of even one of the categories at any place seems
unimaginable. Will the categories last as they are today? The
answer is elusive .. .. Changes in music are so subtle and swift!
But as the categories very nearly correspond to the levels of
human personality they are likely to remain with us till we
ourselves change radically.

28 HINDUSTANI MUSIC

renounce his throne and was exiled to Calcutta, He is reported
to have written about 105 books during his lifetime and Bani is
written as a guru and composer. The book is divided into six
chapters devoted Tespectively to sur, tal, nritya, rahas, bhadaiti,

mahalat or begmat-ke-ketab,

Some interesting features of the work are:
@ The texts of Bengali dadra-s and thumri-s are given, a feature
of great significance.
™ Urdu terminology is used in chapters on tala and Jaya.
@ Dhrupad-s included in the work have only two parts, sthayi
and antara.
™ Compositions categorized as chota
ties of bandish-ki-thumri.
™ Some compositions are sargam-s, that is,
sol-fa names.

khayal-s display the quali-

songs consisting of

Many Indian scholars be
Hindustani music in re;
from the early decades
welcome addition to the
Indologists, and a comp

gan to publish material on
gional languages as well as in English
of the nineteenth century. This was a
literature produced by the early British
tehensive history of music would have
to take into account all such efforts. However, the present work
is merely intended to give an idea of how music was changing
and how the scholastic tradition was trying to keep pace with
the changes. Contrary to commonly held beliefs, beginning from
the sixteenth century, music in India and especially the art
variety, underwent a process of transformation for nearly four
centuries to result in the music known today as Hindustani
music. Writings on music lagged behind, but those who wrote
were not oblivious to the developments. The brief review in the
preceding pages should Prepare us to come directly to the per-
forming ideas—the ideas actually manifested in the performance
of music—as relevant today, though they are to be understood
as an outcome of a long process of evolution.

RAGA, TALA AND BANDISH

i ia, it helps to imagine a centre
ee sles eifeee. ae a Cate of the circles per-
Bs isl the motion and significance of two a.
¥ hich Te resent the raga and the tala respectively. le
2 Ske othe melodic. framework, the tala refers to a ee
est pattern of time-beats. In most of the a Z
the two circles weave eit omnia eae sai
x raed, theatre’ acy of the circles. For ed
ren: layer on the fabla or pakhawaj is at the area
pica a Fae dighe active and controls the other. On the of es
ete vocalist or a sitar player occupies the ee ,
ia. nas ne s supreme and controls the tala-circle. te) -
. oe a baton is common to both a vet p=

i i ic,
feditons Se en ike ere It is interest-
perhaps the only nation in the

suing exposition concentrates
ing to note that India is

ma Raga

meal Tala
ag


30 HINDUSTANI MUSIC
world enjoying more than one system of art music.

From Sama to Raga

A phenomenon as complex and sophisticated as the raga can
hardly be expected to exist from the dawn of musical history. It
is the cumulative result of the evolution of Indian music. It is
often maintained that the term raga occurs in Bharata’s
Natyashastra, a treatise on the Indian dramatic tradition which, at
that point of time, inevitably combined dance, drama and music.
However, raga, as is understood today, became a musical force
much later.

In the beginning, the sama chant dominated the Indian mu-
sical expression (c. 1000 B.c.). Sama music chiefly consisted of
chanting of hymns taken selectively from the Rigveda—one of the
oldest human religious expression we have today. The hymns
were in praise of the Vedic (often elemental) gods, and were set
to tunes which existed from the pre-Vedic times. The musical
structure of the sama was characterized by a descending order of
notes which in the initial stage numbered from two to five,
though later the gamut was increased to seven notes.

Definite accents provided tonal contours as well as some
thythmic framework to the chanting. It is important to know that
though there existed a rudimentary way of notating the manner
of chanting, it was the oral tradition which helped maintain the
tradition. As often happens in oral tradition, hand-gestures ac-
companied the chanting and supplied a notation in order to ‘fix’
features essential to it.

Various developments took place before the progressively
enriched tradition of sama culminated in the raga tradition. Over
a period of time the descending sama melodies were further
explored to form swara-grama-s, that is, scales of musical notes
with descending as well as ascending order. In addition, differ-
ent musical notes of the grama-s were used as starting points,
leading to different frameworks of notes, thus, forming multiple
melodic types called jati-s. After this, raga, as we understand it
today, came on the scene.

Somewhat loosely, raga may be described as a basic scale-
pattern, a generative tonal framework or a melodic mould. It is
not surprising that no definite chronology and geography can be
claimed for its evolution. Artistic and cultural forces usually

RAGA, TALA AND BANDISH 31

periodization on the one hand and geographical location on

é other. In all probability, a great number of musical develop-

¢ are simultaneous and occur in many regions. It would,

I ; sfore, be beneficial to accept the long history and multi-

and state
ional development of the raga as a phenomenortan
by the thirteenth century, raga has been unambiguously
ed and fruitfully explored.

| Today, raga is a basic note-pattern formed by selecting notes

e thirteen tonal intervals conventionally established in
= space. However, unlike the Western system of ae
other possible pitch-gradations which could be detected in

een the thirteen tonal intervals are explored by musicians
ing performances, though the intervals do not figure in the

Sa Re Ga Ma Pa Dha Ni
Thirteen tonal intervals illustrated through the keyboard
of a harmonium.

i tes are selected from ascending as well as de-
Renting paiyension Frameworks, thus, provided by the e
lected notes (selected from the eligible thirteen) function as the
ground-plan to be adhered to. The elaboration of the raga is to
create more and more patterns on the basis of this ground-plan.
Vocalists and instrumentalists can, therefore, improvise to create


32 HINDUSTANI MUSIC

new tonal patterns expected to be pleasing to the ears of the
listeners. In Indian music there is no score or an elaborately
worked-out piece of music for a performer. The Indian art mu-
sician is a performer who composes as he goes along, a situation
fairly similar to that of the jazz musician.

Examined musically, the situation allows a musician un-
bounded freedom which is almost frightening—mainly because
of the immense possibilities! Hence, the raga has been subjected
to certain grammatical rules to provide a firm base for an artist’s
imagination, craftsmanship and virtuosity. Some of the impor-
tant rules which govern the structure of a raga are:

1. A raga cannot constitute less than five notes.

2. It must have a name and clearly defined ascending and
descending progressions of notes.

3. A raga is described as odava (having five notes), shadava
(having six notes), and sampurna (having seven notes), that
is, the number of notes included in it is used as a criterion.
Further sub-classes are possible. For example, a raga might
have five notes in the ascent and six in the descent and will,
therefore, be called odava—shadava.

4. Every raga generally concentrates on the lower or the upper
half of the octave space. Within the selected half, one note is
given the status of the vadi, that is, the main spokesman. The
fourth or the fifth note from the vadi is called samvadi, that is,
one in conversation with the vadi. The remaining notes in-
cluded in the particular raga are called anuvadi —followers of
the vadi, and those excluded are known as vivadi-s—notes in
disagreement with the vadi. It is clear that the rules facilitate
creation of patterns. In function, they may be compared
somewhat to the dominant and the subdominant chords in
the Western system of thematic and tonal elaboration known
as harmony.

5. Generally, a raga is presumed to be expressed chiefly in one of
the three tempi, namely vilambit (slow), madhya (medium), and
drut (fast). In addition, it is also mainly assigned to a particular
octave area conducive to its special kind of elaboration. For
example, mandra (low), madhya (middle), and far (high) octaves
are specifically linked with specific raga-s. The use of appropri-
ate tempo and exploration of the relevant octave space are
directly related to the successful creation of moods.

RAGA, TALA AND BANDISH 33

aT ian music, the mood—music relationship, especially

in Be cecie, is largely governed by the tenets pane
the well-known rasa theory, originally pa e
Bharata in the oft-quoted Natyashastra (discus ~

pter 2). So strong is the tradition that even the fo!

‘and popular categories of music are affected by the

AZ
KAS

lumber of Notes; 2. Time of the day; 3. Season; 4. Region;
: caphaet / Uttarang Pradhan; 6. Alap / Tan ein
7, Mishra / Jod; 8. Aam / Achop (Prachalita / Aprachalita):
9. Hindustani / Carnatic; 10. Raga / Rasa; tae Raga / unraga;
12. Raga-Ragini; 13. According to Vadi-Samvadi

Raga as a circle with thirteen segments.

association of raga and moods. The rasa theory mene
basic and universal sentiments and these provide the ack-
ground for accepted Indian equations between specific raga-s
and certain moods.


RAGA, TALA AND BANDISH 35

34 HINDUSTANI MusIC

For e: :
eee as . It is obvious that the people and the regions
Jogiya Moop Rasa into prominence had their own popular tunes or musical
Bahar Sonne Karuna ;
Darbari Kanada oh , Shringara music (of which raga music is a highly processed mani-
Adana vaiue, Karuna and the theoreticians associated with it were quick to
Khamaj Love. Mi c the eae ae erie a See tradi-
7. In additi ringara Sonsequently, many of the raga-s bear a clear impression
rg to moods, raga-s are also related to a F regional origin. For example:
MonrHs Ra y REGION
March-April. nat } i Sindh (Pakistan)
May-June pal ” Bengali West Bengal/Bangladesh
July-August Me / Marwar (Rajasthan)
September—Octob egh Telangana (Andhra Pradesh)
November—Dec "b pg 7 Saurashtra (Gujarat)
January-February a pot Karnataka (collectively refers to South India)
Tradition holds that th ae Jaunpuri Jaunpur (Uttar Pradesh)
 raga-s described as seasonal can be Multani Multan (Pakistan)

Of great interest is the concept of ragini-s. A raga is deemed
8. There i i = to represent the male principle and ragini the female prin-
tathon chat a IO CH Se the raga-season association in ciple. The way the feature came to be formulated, the chief
Many performers follow the audi a raga—time association. problem is to determine the basis on which the differentia-
many theoreticians have maces ting norm assiduously and tion is to be effected. In the medieval tradition there were
appealing music_time Passionately argued about it. In an five or six ‘original’ raga-s and thirty ragini-s (original in this
correspondence, the day-night cycle context means as found in the ancient tradition). It is some-

is divided int z
‘© segments and the resulting time-cycle times argued that melodies with a slow tempo and serious
mood are to be classified as raga-s, while those registering

the opposite impact are called ragini-s. However, this ap-
pears to be speculative because the seemingly logical posi-

sung/played at any time of the day during the seasons

cantly, all raga-s are not allotted time-slots, but each time-slot

is given some p

relationship, i es A . admitted that the time-raga tion is not borne out by closer analysis of the raga—ragini-s in

non-musical aspects ze me in the rules, links music to many circulation. Once again, it seems to be a case of of trying to

Hie Bor: © around, and in the process en- fit a ee into seemingly obvious and analogous hu-
man moulds.

c . el different cultural and assimilative concern
e : .

music and cipeaet ie ther interesting feature of Indian Yet, the division of the raga corpus according to the masculin-
raga-s. ¥ its raga-lore, namely, the names of the lty-femininity criterion resulted in a very potent, inter-art expres-
sion during the late medieval age—the Ragamala paintings.
After a.p. 1000. an LD) Description of the raga-ragini-s as human beings and their
nent were clearly pone the regions in the Indian subconti- depiction in paintings is today an established and unique tradition
of their own, with ed mearas asserting separate identities in Indian miniatures. Four styles were employed in executing the
representative languages as well Ragamala series: Kangra, Rajput, Mughal, and finally the Deccani.


36 HINDUSTANI MUSIC

The styles differ in their depiction of the raga-s with the
exception of the six ancient major raga-s and the ragini-s associ-
ated with them. In the final analysis, it is the supremacy of the
individual artist who enjoyed the privilege of interpreting the
raga as well as the tradition of painting he was working in,

which is underlined.

It is certain that the raga has come to enjoy the status and
charm it has because of varied contributions made to its emer-
gence by people, regions and traditions. The variety of contribu-
tions is well reflected in the myths woven around raga-s. Myths
are evidence of the potency of the phenomenon concerned and
indicate the significance of the object mythologized. For example
the myth connected with raga Malhar tells us about the power of
the raga to induce rains, while raga Deepak is said to have the
powerful property to create intense heat and fire in and around

the singer.

Raga-s are credited with an appeal to attract birds and beasts
around the performer. On the other hand, they are also believed
to have death-defying powers. Bilaskhan, son of the famous
musician Tansen, is reported to have sung so mournfully at the
head of the dead body of his father that the corpse shed tears

and, thus, was born raga Bilaskhani Todi!

For Indian musicians groomed in the tradition, raga is not
grammar but a deity. The raga is to be invoked and not simply
presented with skill. The listeners, on the other hand, are ex-
pected to not to treat the raga merely as a performance of music
to be applauded at the end. The first step is to allow the raga to
reach and move you, and the second is to allow oneself to
respond to it. This is so because every raga is a channel for the
meeting of two or more minds sharing a love for music. A raga
may attract initially due to its patterns but its ultimate appeal

is due to its emotional content or the i i
¢ rasa (sentim
activates it. ig

Tala

Tala is the second concept explored by the Indian musical
nius, especially in the art music traditicn, including the well:
known Hindustani and the Carnatic. In importance and evolu-
tion, tala is at par with raga in India. As already pointed out, raga
and tala taken together, go a long way in distinguishing Indian

RAGA, TALA AND BANDISH 37

Jaic from other systems of the world. Of the two major dimen-
of music, the melodic and the rhythmic, the former is
\inly expressed through musical notes while the latter chiefly
slores the dimension of time through beats. The melodic di-
sion evolved into the raga after many processes, and the tala
ted from a similar evolution in the rhythmic dimension.

The term fala is derived from the Sanskrit root-word fal, to
e with palms. Early music-makers could easily be imagined
‘have employed claps or palm-strokes to mark time in dance
4 music, the two performing arts in which fala plays a vital

Tala, as an idea, is embedded in the concept of time which,
course, has many varieties. For example, ‘clock time’ enables
' ito count seconds, minutes and hours; refer to the past, present
i future. Then we have ‘psychological time’ which seems to
orten hours of happiness and lengthen minutes of sorrows, as
ere. These two varieties of time are clearly beyond our con-
Further, they, in themselves, do not have value or quality
ed to them. It is in music that time acquires an intrinsic
jlue just as space becomes valuable and qualitative in spatial
ris such as painting and sculpture. Different musical cultures
the miracle of transforming ‘time’ into ‘musical time’ by
(opting various procedures. However, the manner in which
dustani music achieves this is our present concern.
As in the case of the raga, it is the artist, the creator, who
es the decision of bestowing ‘quality’ on time by differentiat-
musical time from the other two varieties. Clock-time cannot
he manipulated, a feature which distinguishes it from musical
ime because, the music-maker creates and manipulates his time
and gains control over it. As far as psychological time is con-
‘terned, it varies from person to person as also from moment to
moment. On the other hand, musical time severs its connections
with the day-to-day world and evinces a vitality of its own. How
does an artist accomplish this astonishing task?

A musician creates time by thinking out, imagining a begin-
ning to, and a divided flow of time as the first step. A musician
can, therefore, decide to have a beginning to a tala whenever he
wants. The other two varieties can hardly allow for such liber-
ties! This act creates the first beat. The time flow is now released
as well as channelled or directed.


RAGA, TALA AND BANDISH 39

38 HINDUSTANI MUSIC

However, a mere release of time flow would hardly suffic
an unimpeded time flow would simply go on and on, and

thus, fail to create a pattern or make musical sense. Hence, Time flow

artist proceeds to put in successive and equidistant strokes and -—— _ -——— 4 5
2 3

Time divisions

An unvarying tepetition of these patterns ceases to be mean-
ingful and the next logical step, therefore, is to form a bigger
pattern to accommodate many smaller ones (and do something
more). Patterns of longer and shorter durations are grouped
together and are known as §4na-s. One is easily reminded of the
Strategy employed in creating metrical units in Poetry. As we
know, differing patterns of arresting beauty are created in the
Prosodic activity by combining and permuting longer and shorter
durations. To that extent, a metrical line comes close to the idea

1 ge a gg Big y i

Time divisions become circular
Tala concept

ever, the insatiable patterning urge of humans soon ong
thwarted if it is to go round and round with the unchang-
g duration patterns. Hence, some of the dividers are more
“dl tuated and others less so. The result is the creation of : new
nd in to throw up a series of new:
follow. A metrical line can exist singly and one line is adequate and complex pattern—once again to P
itterns.

In a manner of speaking, the entire process described so far

- ilence, how can it
Creative. If the line is repeated in its entirety without a break it was mental. Unless See ice bringing into
creates a series of circular patterns conducive to the generation become music? Can one ? Hence, gradations of sound and
of musical patterns, either melodic or rhythmic. Cyclical and Picture light and darkness iva ocd storey to claps, finger-taps
Tepetitive time-patterns composed of groups of longer and shorter silence are brought into action-by le, a sonorous matra (compa-
durations are, thus, fala-s, as we know them today. To speak of and waving of palms. For example,

au ‘ into a clap, a lesser degree
a tala of four or Six.or sixteen matra-s is, therefore, to refer to table to an accented — A Scour eee the waving of
cycles the circumferences of which are dotted with four or six or of sonority is marked y ee seek saver wound other
sixteen equal divisions to Provide dynamic patterns of time Points. the palm suggests domination


40 HINDUSTANI MUSIC

words, a rhythm pattern is woven out of sound and silence. F
instance, in a teentala of sixteen beats (matra-s), there are claps ¢
the first, fifth and thirteenth matra-s; palm-waving on the
matra and finger-taps on rest of the muatra-s. Every tala
Hindustani art music has an analogous distribution of cla
(tali), finger-taps, and palm-waving (khali or kal). Ancient tre
tises enumerate 108 tala-s, presumably intended to correspond
the number of sacred dances credited to Lord Shiva, the patro
deity of all performing arts. However, contemporary perfo
tradition is normally restricted to about fifteen tala-s.
What began as an idea became a relief map or a sound-scap
when expressed in terms of claps and finger-taps. However, al
gains life and body when instruments play their role. In
present context, instruments of rhythm are those objects capabk
of producing intense, discrete or non-sustained sounds. Instruy
ments of rhythm and their sounds give life to the idea of the tal
Instrumental sounds, when expressed onomatopoetically, for
mulate sound-syllables. These sound-syllables, when fitted suit
ably to the tala divisions create theka-s, the actually played and
heard tala expression in Hindustani music. Theoretically speak.
ing, innumerable theka-s are possible for any tala, provided ins
strumental sounds of the required variety and richness are ava
able. Theka-s provide content to tala-s and raise them above the
level of mathematical formulae. Whether in accompaniment of
in solo renderings, the theka-s convince listeners by a kind of
compositional beauty.
Thus realized, the Hindustani tala-s function as accompan
ing entities in dance and music. They also serve as the basis fo
solo renderings in rhythm music. Instruments such as the tabla.
and the pakhawaj enjoy a rich repertoire of rhythm music. Mas:
tering rhythm music requires years of training and rigorous.
Practice if performing competence is to be achieved. It is
surprising that Hindustani rhythm music has acquired an expan-
sive audience of its own, at home and abroad.

ot

Bandish

The third concept of bandish is loosely translatable as composi-_
tion. In Hindi the term means ‘binding together’, which is a
fairly good description of the function carried out by a bandish.
Musical content must have a ground-plan on which the artist

RAGA, TALA AND BANDISH 41

ibe expected to build with the help of the varied musical
f The bandish performs this task. Usually, the bein a
‘Ww refer to the basic compositions ee by voc : - a‘
sh thei i i However, there is no ju: :
their musical elaborations. ; : revi
, i dish to vocalists an
trict the use of the term ban t i
Bogs, Compositions do exist in instrumental melodic
wo in rhythm music. These are also elaborated, according O
Hlished methods, to greater lengths depending on their po"
ities. With these qualifications it is possible to discuss <
¢ of bandish as a phenomenon. What are the components ct
lish? One cannot perhaps do better than enumerate an
fly describe the major formal features of re gee
uote i vocal music taken in its entirety. It is to be noted 7
lwatures identified as components may not figure in pe i
position but no composition would be possible Bea
iwion of at least some of them. To begin with the struc
: Id help: nail aay
f ‘Obviously, all music must have a marked beginning to pee
} te the commencement of musical ran 2 i a
ic i i hmic. The early tradi-
the music is melodic or rhytl } i
ie cently regarded this portion as essential and named it
i on encement of music is optionally followed by a Laas
of music which functions as a joining passage describe:
ieval musicology as melapaka. ; sal!
i oer 4 portion of music links the beginning with
the core of the concerned musical expression, regarded es-
sential and aptly named dhruva, ges ee ae -
i is followed by music
4. The core musical passage is fo usic ;
} EP erctandably at some distance from the a lnwes be =u
i e J
ise no progression towards the climax wou! *
This p hase ites appropriately been named antara. There Fe
in: cdasions when musical movement ceases before the
clisnax is reached, the antara is regarded optional. he
§, Finally, compositions have portions called abhoga-s wash
to round off the entire musical effort. This too is regarde

optional.

ifyi f a more fundamental
identifying structural features o! :
Mire os aah turn to mention those more directly connected


RAGA, TALA AND BANDISH 43

42 HINDUSTANI MUSIC

the accepted piece is further to be under

| novel, short story, or play. This second level o: i

n the bandish is the genre-level. At this level, eae
Be i ifie 1, thumri, or the like. A genr :

i eee dttes the structural features described

‘ This aspect would be dealt with at a later stage.

with the material of music. It is noteworthy and natural that the itive, However,
basic idea of bandish has a long ancestry. This is well reflected in
the fact of commonality or similarity of structural blocks a
perceived in India, at least since medieval times. In order te
bring home the essential continuity of performing tradition a
also the continued attempts of grammatical tradition to catch up
with it, structural features or blocks of bandish are described here
by referring to terms from earlier periods. Even if these terms
not used today, what they connote tallies with what we do while
making music—an interesting juxtaposition.

6. Swara refers to the body of musical notes that Tepresent the
melodic aspect of music in a composition. A composition
may or may not be in a raga or a combination of raga-s,
However, it is expected to have a recognizable melodic di-
mension. At the same time, it must be remembered that in
thythm music, melody is minimal and to that extent the
swara is affected as regards its effectiveness as well as its
prominence.

7. It has already been explained how tala is a highly processed
rhythm. Though music is possible without using fala or its
combinations, it cannot do without some kind of thythm,
however weak, slight or irregular it may be. In such cases,
thythm is manifest merely as an element that marks divi-
sions im an otherwise continuous activity.

8. In a bandish, the composition may or may not use meaning-
ful language units, that is, words, etc. This component is
identified as pada. In this context it is to be noted that the use
of meaningless sound-syllables has a long tradition in India.
In fact, they are regarded as auspicious and beneficial and
are called tenaka. Besides, instrumental sounds, their ono-
matopoeic representations have also been employed in mu-
sical composition to add colour to the proceedings. Such
‘words’ are described as patakshara-s. Very often, the name of
the composer, of his patron, deity, or guru, feature in compo-
sitions. This component is called biruda.

s

Bandish or composition is not to be confused with a form or
genre of music. To draw a parallel with literature, it could be
said that a bandish is comparable to a piece of writing acceptable
as a piece of creative literature, as distinct from the critical or

